---
title: identity and
author: igor
template: article.jade
date: 2014-14-26
---

Months ago, I rose up from bed, restless, to sit down and write about "Identity
and Work".

<span class="more"></span>

As often I was distracted by something shiny. But the pulsating blue
light was the bearer of bad news: [a friend had
died](/articles/a-friend-died-last-night). The weeks following his death
occupied me and my friends, at times completely. At other times, [something
external](http://meyerweb.com/eric/thoughts/2014/12/24/inadvertent-algorithmic-cruelty/) 
would trigger it to bubble up and pour out. I spent a lot of time thinking, talking, [and
writing](/articles/opensource-burnout), focusing on depression and addiction.
one major thought however, remained a mere
[footnote](/opensource-burnout/#fn_4): that of identity.


My initial idea for this essay was to be a series, with titles like "identity
and work", "identity and sexuality", "identity and that thing stuck between
your teeth, but it's not annoying enough to get up and floss so you try to suck
it out and while making stupid faces". And it would be nice to be able to
separate those things out neatly. But humans aren't neat. We're messy
containers for trillions of bacteria, which help us separate nutrition elements
from poinsenous ones from little acid drenched chunks of other bacteria
containers.

![pictured: heteronormativity (a couple feeding each other)](http://www.visualphotos.com/photo/2x4811733/couple_feeding_each_other_outdoors_33dk0023rf.jpg)


And our brains are not much different in that regard. So while I understand the
need for separating ones public, private, and other personas — as I myself do!
— I also need to comprehend those persons holistically. 

in a sense, this essay is supposed to be a quantification of the mental self in
essay form. This quantification will be free of numbers. That is mostly because
I'm am as bad with numbers as I am good with words.

Controlling Daemons
-------------------

one of the troubling bits of (geek) folklore is Sussman's famous "quote from the SICP:

> When you know a daemon's *true* name, you have control over it.

This belief is especially troubling for trans people, but also for other
marginalized groups who would prefer to remain anonymous, or pseudonymous. We
obsess with the true name (and history) of our daemons (those who are not like
us) because we are obsessed with control. Even, or especially, those in our
circles who experienced bullying (marginalization and control through someone
in power) are all too eager to control (bully, troll, doxx) "daemons".

To misquote Alan Perlis,

> Programmers know the name of everything, and the value of nothing.

Especially not the value of another's life. One who is not like them

This troubling part of geekdom cuts deep against the core, because it means
that part of me, some of my identities will always be questioned.
This used to be the case when my German was not fluent, and is now the case
that I'm no longer fluent in my mother tongue

> But where are you really from?

A question I could answer then as inadequately as I can now.

But these days, in my field, I am unquestionable. I am white. Male. Have
"merit" in my various tech and open source communities. And above all,

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en">
<p>i&#39;m a white man who experienced war in Europe, fled to another country
and is able to retell it in a way that is believable: in English</p>&mdash; The
Wrath of PB™ (@hirojin) <a href="https://twitter.com/hirojin/status/542971728239276033">December 11, 2014</a>
</blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I never lived through any direct violence of war. And yet my family remains
scarred from war. I lost one uncle, my sister[<a id="ref_1" href="#fn_1">1</a>]
her father. When my mother got the news that my cousin lost his hand, my mother
channelled all those emotions she received through the phone. I felt absolutely
helpless. In retrospect it's hard to pin-point if this was another point where
I felt helpless because I didn't know how to act as "man" (I was perhaps ten),
or just another point where I felt emotionally overwhelmed. Perhaps those two
aren't all that unrelated.

And so it remains, after all those years, that both, in geekdom, and in my
family, one core-part of my identity has always been erased. Well, not really
erased, but left out. Unmentioned, and unlived, my queerness shrivelled away,
and with it so did I.

The fact that *sexuality* is immediately associated with *sex*, when even
"mainstream sex" is still a taboo, makes public discussion of LGBTQA issues, or
public consumption of LGBTQA (friendly!) media quite difficult. It makes
consumption of LGBTQA media feel filthy. This all the while hetero is the
undiscussed normal. But what this means is that we simply don't talk about how
much we talk (or represent) it. When I chose queer to label myself, it was
because the word is one (tiny) step removed from bi**sex**ual. When I chose
queer, it was to position myself (and those who are like me) in the
"alternative mainstream". 

![parallel rivers of Yunnan](http://www.tour-trip.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Three_Parallel_Rivers_Yunnan.jpg)

I don't know how meaningful it is to label myself with trusted friends and
colleagues as queer.  I don't know how much impact it has when on a conference,
[infront of barely 20 people](https://blag.esotericsystems.at/articles/opensource-burnout/),
I tell them that they were wrong in assuming I'm another straight white guy.

I'm saying this, of course, because a core part of this essay was meant to be a
dissection of masculinity. But, that was five months ago. Today, we'll look at
it from a different angle

What you always wanted to know, but your dad never told you about Masculinity
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Let's cut the chase here and say it as clear and simple as I possibly can:

Growing up, I haven't had a single positive male role model. Most of the men in
my family were either absent, alcoholics, abusers, or some other form of a.

And, like many people from a generation lost generation to physical and
emotional abuse, I spent my late teens and early twenties in drug abuse, with a
slow descend into depression and disassociation.


--- 

[<span id="fn_1">1</span>]: cousin, if you want to be a pedant. but growing up
we were so close, that we called each other brothers and sisters. [↲](#ref_1)

[<span id="fn_X">X</span>]: X [↲](#ref_X)
